Welcome to Say More from Boston Globe
Opinion. [music] I'm Shirley Le Young.
This is episode two of our series, The
Seawword: [music] Stories of Cancer.
Today we're talking to the man who wrote
the book on [music] cancer. Sedartha
Mukerji is the author of the Emperor of
All Malades. [music] It covers the long
history of this disease, why it haunts
us, why it's so hard to beat, and why
there's hope.
Sedartha, who goes by Sid, learned
everything he knows about cancer while
working in Boston as a young doctor. I
traveled [music] to New York to meet him
at his lab at Columbia University
Medical Center. I asked him about the
title of his book, why when it comes to
disease, cancer is the emperor.
At the end of the book, I realized that
this was a disease that had occupied our
brains and minds and bodies for
centuries in a way that really no
disease had. This was the thing that we
had battled for so many years and have
continued to battle. You know, in the
1950s, people would say, you know, what
do you want to be when you grow up? And
people would say, I want to be a rocket
scientist.
In the 1960s and 1970s, if you ask the
same question to a young man or woman,
they would say, I'd want to be a cancer
doctor. There's a spirit in which this
has reigned so large over our
imagination
that it seemed like like of all
illnesses, this was like the emperor,
the most important and perhaps the one
that we need to defeat.
Mhm. So, it's been 15 years since your
book's been out. Um, and many of the
meaty chapters in the book, you know,
were about research breakthroughs and
leading to life-saving treatments. um in
the late 1990s and early 2000s. So, are
those chapters out of date now? I mean,
so um you'll be glad to know that in
September we're publishing a uh an
evergreen update.
Mhm.
With uh five new chapters.
Oh, really?
Yeah. Um I'm writing them as we speak.
And directly after this interview, I'm
going to my publisher to start uh
putting them down on um real paper,
editing them and so forth. So the book
will become Evergreen again in
September. There's a new release called
Emperor of Malades 2, which is of course
a release of the new chapters with all
the updates from that. when we start to
read those five chapters I mean will
show how fastm moving the research is or
what will it show
it'll show a mix of things it'll show
the disappointments I mean you know the
emperor malades was not written as a
kind of a triumphalist history it was
written as a kind of process of science
and the process of science involves
defeats it involves disappointments it
involves uh griefs it'll show all of
that
and when you finished your book 15 years
ago I mean did foresee you know what you
are laying out in these five new
chapters or is that was that a surprise
to you or was did you see that coming?
I don't think it was a surprise. Some of
it was in process you know um
imunotherapy imunological therapy for
melanoma and um other cancers was in its
early infancy. Some of the new chapters
on breast cancer are amazing. Some of
the new chapters on other cancers are
just really really different. So it's a
mix. Some of some of these were early in
development, some of these were late in
development, but all of these are great
successes, great surprises.
Um, and I think there's no way to
describe them aside from the fact that,
you know, we're fortunate to have them.
We're fortunate to have these
researchers dedicate their lives and
we're fortunate to have patients enroll
in trials to get these treatments into
into into real life.
I mean, but at the same time, you know,
there's been a lot written about younger
people getting cancer, right? Which uh
you know, usually you think of this as a
disease of very old people, right? But
now there's cancer 20s, 30s, 40s. I
mean, I know people my own life who had
cancer in their 40s and have passed
away. At the same time, there's all
these new treatments, right, that that
you've just laid out. And I think about
um I'd never heard this term before, but
I love it. This this idea of the red
queen hypothesis and kind of this idea
about it's almost like an evol
evolutionary arms race where, you know,
science has to constantly keep up um
just to stay in the same place. And um
talk more about that.
Well, you know, the the idea of the Red
Queen is that um we we never conquer a
disease. We're always in equilibrium
with the disease. It's a kind of um a
game of chess. The disease plays its
game. We play a game and we figure out
how to resolve these two games. A lot of
the young cancer that we're diagnosing
are because of better diagnostic
technologies. But that's not all. Habits
have changed. uh people have changed,
carcinogens may have changed. Overall,
if you look at the data, the rate of
cancer deaths in the United States has
been decreasing
pretty consistently.
Oh, I didn't know that to know.
Overall, yeah, um young, old, everything
combined. And the decrease is is
important and striking. Over the last 15
to 20 odd years, it's decreased almost
from I'll just give you a kind of rough
number from a um 150 per 100,000 to 110
per 100,000. That's a big number. That's
a big big big big big number. Some
cancers are changing. Some are on the
rise. Some are on the fall. But overall
the the effect has been positive. It's
been enormous
and it's been under underestimated and
under reportported. So would you say
we're winning this medical chess game
then?
Winning is you know is a complicated
word. Your definition of winning might
be my not my definition of winning you
know but are we moving in the right
direction? Yes, we are moving in the
positive direction for many cancers,
many of the common cancers. Some we're
still struggling with. Pancreatic cancer
was struggling with
some are increasing and we don't know
why, but overall the direction is not
negative but positive. So, one of the
things you're really good at is
explaining to non-d doctors why cancer
is so hard to treat um compared to other
diseases. So, so what makes it so
tricky?
Well, one of the thing that's very
tricky about cancer is that cancer
arises from your own cells. It's not an
external invader. It's not like a
bacterial infection. It's not like a
viral infection. Although viruses can
cause cancer, but really ultimately it's
the your own cell that's gone wrong.
And the differences between a cancer
cell and a normal growing cell are
pretty subtle. One of the things that we
struggled with is how do we kill a
cancer cell without killing a normal
cell
because the differences are so subtle.
And so what are the distinctions? How do
we find the the particular
vulnerabilities of a cancer cell that
are not the same as the other cell? When
you think about chemotherapy, think
about standard chemotherapy.
Not in modern chemotherapy, but standard
chemotherapy. It makes you kill all
growing cells. You know, you lose your
hair, you lose your skin, you lose, you
know, your immune system, things that
grow. And that's because we're we are
targeting growth in general, but growth
is important for every cell. growth is
important for our bodies to maintain our
our ourselves. So, so the the real trick
in cancer is to be
exactly discriminating between the
normal and the cancer cell. And that's a
very hard trick because they're very
closely related to each other. One
arises from the other because of
mutations, but also one arises because
of subtle mutations. It's not like the
whole cell turns into a monster. It's
very particular things allow the cancer
cells to grow while normal cells don't
grow.
I'm so glad you brought that up because
I think that's one of the reasons why it
makes cancer so scary is because it
comes within ourselves. We are the
enemy.
Yeah.
So you made a distinction between modern
chemotherapy and standard chemotherapy.
What does that mean? Well, the more and
more um standard chemotherapy was uh
directed at saying let's kill all
growing cells and if there's collateral
damage to normal growth, it's just
collateral damage. And that's why
chemotherapy was so toxic. Modern
chemotherapy and the more and more is
about trying to find out what is
precisely different about cancerous
growth versus or malignant growth versus
normal growth.
And we found that in fact that they are
different. Cancer cells use different
metabolic pathways. They use different
uh ways of growing. Um and that's why a
modern chemotherapy
we we want to think is less toxic,
is more directed, is more targeted, is
more personalized
and and has been generally speaking more
less toxic uh less poisonous
than the chemotherapy devised in the
1950s and 1960s. I mean used to be you
think of someone on chemotherapy they
lost their hair they lost weight but now
people go through chemotherapy and they
had their hair right you something you
didn't even know
is just the beginning of it right I mean
you know people with myoma are living
tens of years 20s of years
and surviving they're going to work
they're
being members of society they're
enjoying their children their
grandchildren in a way that they weren't
before and that's again because we found
these Achilles heels and these Achilles
heels are very important because they're
exactly that. They're achilles heals.
They are ways in which cancer cells
resist the normal controls of growth and
are able to grow despite those normal
controls. So,
I mean, it seems like it's huge for
quality of life for patients.
Quality of life, but ultimately
survival.
[music]
More [music] of my conversation with Dr.
Mukerji after this short break.
[music]
I want to bring our conversation to
Boston. Uh you went to Harvard Medical
School. You did your residency at Mass
General. Uh I think you did a fellowship
at Dana Farber uh Cancer Institute as
well. I mean you you really spent your
formative years in Boston uh before
heading to Colombia. So, how do you
think about your time back in Boston and
what did you learn about cancer being
there?
Well, I learned everything about cancer
being there. I mean, it was my formative
years. Those were the years in which I
learned to understand cancer. I learned
to understand the mutations. I I learned
to understand the effects that cancer
have on cells. But I think most most
importantly, I learned to understand the
effect that cancers have on people's
lives. Um
through the patients you saw
through the patients that I saw
I saw hundreds of patients I saw
patients of from every ilk of life and
they shared this
same drive to live but they shared a
kind of dignity that was very important
and Boston my time in Boston taught me
that the dignity of a patient is just as
important as a patient's life
and that the dignity of a patient is
something that's negotiated. Um I often
teach my students this that uh therapy,
cancer therapy is not an absolute, it's
a negotiation.
You have to ask a patient what do you
want out of this?
How how far do you want to push? Because
you can push very far.
Um where do you want your life to be?
What do you want your life to look like?
and how far are you willing to
participate for instance in a clinical
trial or in deeper and deeper um
segments of cancer therapy.
All of that I learned in Boston and I
think that that idea was really
initiated for me in Boston and for the
world in Boston because Boston's one of
the centers of of [snorts] cancer
biology and cancer therapy.
Can you share one story about a patient
maybe Carla from ITSWitch? Yeah, Carla.
Um um very important story. Um Carla was
an adult with acute lymphablastic
leukemia. I met her early on in my
fellowship.
She had young children then
and she wanted them to go to college.
She wanted to see them in college. She
for some reason she she wanted them to
go to Princeton. And so I was like Carla
will get your kids to Princeton.
Um, I mean the kids will get to them
Princeton by themselves, but Carla will
get you to see them in college.
This is the therapy.
This is the therapy. And so
therapy, you know, we think about cancer
therapy in so many different ways. We
think of cancer therapy as medicines,
but cancer therapy is psychological.
Cancer therapy is psychotherapy, you
know,
unlike virtually any other discipline. A
cardiologist becomes your
psychotherapist. It becomes your
colleague. becomes your friend. He or
she becomes your,
you know, the person you talk the most
intimately about your life with.
[snorts] Um, and and and Carla lived. We
we cured.
And you didn't you didn't think she
would live, though.
I I didn't think she would live.
What happened? I mean, it was during the
course of your book and treatment. I
mean,
what happened? No one knows what
happened. You know, it was some
combination of genetics and therapy and
her persistence to come to every
appointment.
um
in the horrible Boston traffic, right?
In the horrible Boston traffic in the
middle of the winter when the snows were
terrible, but she lived and she got to
see her children
go to college. It was an enormous
victory.
And how did those conversations with
Carla or others I mean did any of it
surprise you or or and how did it did
any of that change your perspective as a
doctor?
Every conversation is a surprise. You
know, some people say, "Listen, I'm
done. I'm I I've had enough. And you
might not expect it.
Some people might say in the beginning
that they want to be done and they all
of a sudden change their minds and say,
"I want to continue." So every
conversation is a and and you have to
negotiate it.
You can say to them, "You're so close.
Are you sure?" And they might say, "Yes,
I'm sure." And then you say you, you
know, it's it's again its own game. It's
a chess match. You have to be certain,
but you can't be too certain because you
aren't. You have to tell the truth.
There's a very beautiful line from Emily
Dickinson which says, "Tell the truth,
but tell it slant."
And that really means that when you
encounter a cancer patient, you tell the
truth always. You always tell the truth,
but sometimes you have to tell it slant.
And by slant
Dickinson means tell it in a way that it
can be
absorbed
in a way that's not final.
Americans deal with finalities.
Here is a number. Your survival is x%.
But that's not true.
Your survival is a very complex number
that depends on your genetics, your
environment, your capacity to tolerate
a trial. And so
telling the truth slant.
It's an incredible piece of wisdom by
Dickinson.
So my background is in um business and
finance reporting. And so I was really
fascinated to learn about the history of
cancer philanthropy and fundraising um
in Boston. Um it sounds like we probably
pioneered it, right?
Boston was certainly one of the places
that pioneered it along with, you know,
Sydney Farber and Mary Lasker would be
two [clears throat] famous
Yeah.
figures.
Well, and Jimmy Farber Jimmy Fund.
Right. Right. Right. So So I think about
our main cancer center Dana Farber name
where the Farbirds named after um you
know Dr. Sydney Farber who's who's um
known as the father of modern
chemotherapy and um and so he really you
know invented this idea of cancer
philanthropy which is [snorts] so
fascinating in your book and with Mary
Lazer and um so how important was he and
Lasker in in the way we think about
cancer now?
Oh crucially important. I mean I think
you know Farber and Lasers that their
their partnership lasted a lifetime. Um
and I think the idea that they could
there was truly important that they
figured out that that the only way to
beat cancer was not just through
private engagement with patients but
through a larger public engagement.
And she was like the marketer and
fundraiser.
She was a marketer and fundraiser and
she was amazing at it. She went to
Congress. She went to patients. She was
a patient advocate. She was a political
advocate. She was everything rolled into
one. And
I think that, you know, she was just a
remarkable figure. She moved it from a
disease that was in the sort of
backdrops. She
came out in front and said, you know, we
need to talk about this disease. We need
to talk about it politically. We need to
talk about it financially. We need to
talk about it as a budget. And to really
think about the idea that this was
something special
that patients were suffering, they were
under served and that they would be
better served by a special institute for
themselves. She really mobilized
Congress and ultimately was responsible
for the drafting of the idea of the war
on cancer.
Congress political entities don't
declare wars on diseases. We declare
unfortunately
Unfortunately, we declare wars on
nations. But it would be so wonderful if
we declared wars on diseases and Mary
Lazer was the the first person to really
coalesce on the idea that the job of
Congress was to declare war on diseases,
war on things that haunted human beings.
So going forward, I mean, what would it
take for Boston to kind of continue to
be an important place for u cancer
research? I think the important thing is
to attract talent and talent comes from
different places these days. Um, in the
United States, talent has almost always
come from a mixture of of local talent
and immigration. Ecosystems form.
Ecosystems are really important because
you and I talk to each other one day in
the common dining space of an institute
and I say to myself, "Oh my god, you had
that was a really smart idea. How can I
apply to cancer?
These ecosystems are networks and if
anything the last 10 years have
demonstrated the importance of networks
in all of social sciences. Um Boston was
and still to some extent is one of the
magnets of world talent. If you're a kid
in Kenya,
you say to yourself, "And I want to cure
cancer." You say to yourself, "How can I
get myself to the Dana Farber Cancer
Institute?"
And you drive yourself there. And then
you meet other people who have the same
vision.
And then you find that there are funds
available for you to be able to do that
research. That's what the magnetism is.
And if you lose that magnetism, I think
you lose everything.
Your book actually lays out how
important federal funding was to all the
treatments we're seeing now with breast
cancer, leukemia. Maybe spell it out a
little bit more.
You know, I sometimes I I'm I'm just
writing a piece um about the idea that
oh, you know, we got we got co vaccines
and it's the Mona vaccine, but it's not
really the Mona vaccine. It's the NIH
vaccine. That's right.
The NIH is the one that supported years
and years of
mRNA
mRNA research by Drew Weissman and
Catalina Carico to create what would
eventually become the modernity.
And they didn't know what it was.
Yeah.
Over and over again, the idea of science
funding
translated into human research has
turned out to be enormously valuable.
Hundreds of thousands if not millions of
people have been saved by
just the drug hercept. Think of the
number of people in your own life. You
could name each of us can name a person
and think of the network effect. Um a
mother who would have died at age 38 who
now is alive at age 52.
Mhm.
And those years of her life were given
to bringing up her child.
It's just impossible for me to
enumerate. People have done numbers on
this and and showed that
you know every dollar spent on the NIH
converts into tens if not hundreds of
dollars um saved in human capital and I
think we underestimate it and you know
slashing that is just this is the worst
idea on the planet.
Can can private philanthropy make
no no make up the difference?
It cannot. Private philanthropy is an
adjunct.
the central forces have to come from the
from federal
federal sources.
Why? It's just because private
philanthropy
historically follows
the direction of what we are thinking
from the center. That's the seed. It's
the spark that lights the fire.
And without that fire, we're we're we're
really done for. So, one of the big
takeaways of your book is the need to
reimagine um how we think about cancer
um and how and how that in itself would
be a victory if we could reimagine how
we think about cancer and that cancer
isn't eminent death that it's not about
finding a universal cure uh but that the
disease can be managed. So, so talk to
me more about that. I think of cancer
more and more as a journey. In some
cases, the journey is abruptly
terminated, which is sad. But in many,
many cases, the journey continues. And
while the journey continues, we've given
back people real lives. They're not just
obsessed with the journey. It's not like
they're in the hospital all the time.
They're going back to their homes.
They're going back to their real lives
and then coming to the hospital for
their treatment. So, um, I think that's
that's a real change. What do you think
people get wrong about cancer in our
society? And you know what is the one
thing you want people to understand
about the disease?
Well, I think they need to understand
it's not death it's not a death
sentence. It is one word in a sentence
that continues for a very very long
time. Uh it's one word in a paragraph
[snorts]
and that paragraph continues for a very
long time for different cancers. I don't
want to give people false hope. Um, some
cancers are deadly, but I also want to
give the people the idea that people
continue lives, their lives beyond
cancer, [music] their lives with cancer,
their lives um that accompany cancer.
And I think that that's what's missing.
Sedartha Mukerji is a physician [music]
and assistant professor of medicine and
researcher at Columbia University. He's
also the author of The Emperor of All
Malades 1 and two and other
award-winning books of medicine. Thank
you so much for hosting us here at
Columbia.
My pleasure. Thank you for coming.
Next week on Sayore here in Boston, a
prominent oncologist had breast cancer,
but she didn't tell anyone [music]
for years. Her husband Barrett Rollins
is also a cancer doctor and he helped
her. I was complicit [music]
in her desire to hide what was going on
and I really kind of believed that
everything was fine.
We talked to Barrett about why some
people can't [music] face this disease
and the toll it takes on those around
them. We hope you'll listen.
Seymour is a production of the Boston
Globe. Today's episode was produced by
Anna Kmer. Our editor is Jim Dao. Our
engineer is Uzair Ahmed. If you like the
show, please follow us and leave us a
review on Apple, Spotify, [music]
or wherever you get your podcasts. You
can email us at saymore@globe.com.
I'm Shirley Leang. Thanks for [music]
listening.
[music]